<!-- Written by: Yun Yan (https://github.com/Puriney) -->

# Preprocessing


All the following operations are using the tutorial folder path as the working directory. 

``` bash
cd PATH_IN_YOUR_COMPUTER/wellDA-seq/tutorial
```

## 1. Preprocessing the scATAC modality data

Input: 
1. The pair-end FASTQ files for the scATAC modality. 
    - <kbd>fq/DCIS66T_chip2/atac/DCIS66T_chip2.demplxed.PE1.fastq.gz</kbd>
    - <kbd>fq/DCIS66T_chip2/atac/DCIS66T_chip2.demplxed.PE2.fastq.gz</kbd>
2. The text file recording the wells with cells dispensed. 
    - <kbd>wafergen/135581_insue_WellList.TXT</kbd>

With FASTQ files as input, we use scATAC-pro to map reads to genome and generates the ATAC
 fragment file of Tn5 insertions. The ATAC fragment file is the common format of inputs of other downstream analysis tools, including ArchR and Signac. 

Expected output: a Signac object.

### 1.1. Generating scATAC fragment file by scATAC-pro

Here is an example of a particular read in the FASTQ file. It is from the cell 'A13_A10'. With this format, scATAC-pro will assign data to each single cell.

``` bash
zcat DCIS66T_chip2.demplxed.PE1.fastq.gz | head -8
```

```
@A13_A10:VH00219:49:AACYKCYM5:1:1101:20674:7759 1:N:0:TAAGGCGAATC+CGATACACTCA
CTAAAGGGTTGTAGCTGTGAAGGAATAATGGGCGGAGTGGTGGCACACACGGCATT
+
C;C-CC-CC-CCC-;CCCCCC;CCCCCCCCC-CC;CC;CCCC;;CCCCCCCCCCCC
@A13_A10:VH00219:49:AACYKCYM5:1:1101:23420:27239 1:N:0:TAAGGCGAATC+CGATACACTCA
AGGCTGGGAAGCCCAAGACCAAAGTACCAGCAGATTTGGTGTCTGGTGAGGGGCTG
+
CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCC
```


Create a configuration file for scATAC-pro. To run each sample, scATAC-pro requires a separate configuration file, which specifies the prerequisite files, such as path to the aligner, the genome index, and the genome version. Here, the config file of DCIS66T_chip2 is 'DCIS66T_chip2.config.txt' in the 'scripts' folder. For example, here the reads are mapped to the human genome assembly hg19 by using the aligner bowtie2.

Run scATAC-pro by using the bash script 's2.scatacpro.sh' in the 'scripts' folder.

``` bash
sh scripts/s2.scatacpro.sh DCIS66T_chip2 "atac"
```

Below are the expected results:

```
.
├── DCIS66T_chip2.fragments.tsv.len.gz
├── DCIS66T_chip2.MACS2.qc_per_barcode.txt
├── DCIS66T_chip2.MappingStats
├── cell_barcodes.MappingStats
├── DCIS66T_chip2.fragments.tsv.gz      <---- fragment file !!!
├── DCIS66T_chip2.fragments.tsv.gz.tbi      
└── scATAC-pro_report_DCIS66T_chip2.html
```

The first 10 lines of the fragment, which is the standard format as described by 10X ([link](https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/software/cell-ranger-arc/latest/analysis/fragments-file)):

```bash
zcat DCIS66T_chip2.fragments.tsv.gz | head -10
```


```
chr1    10119   10239   L14_C7  1
chr1    10443   10544   M16_A9  2
chr1    10472   10566   C16_D10 3
chr1    10495   10612   C17_K8  4
chr1    10495   10595   A15_O8  4
chr1    10522   10600   P15_L7  3
chr1    10558   10627   N14_D10 4
chr1    13041   13109   I14_P7  4
chr1    13452   13542   L13_L7  3
chr1    13458   13529   J16_D10 5
```

### 1.2. Quality-control by ArchR

The quality of single cell is evaluated based on TSS enrichment score and the number of unique fragments, which are computed using ArchR. 

The intial quality-control on the scATAC data was performed mainly based on the TSS enrichment score (no less than 8) and the number of unique fragments (no less than 1000) of each cell. 

``` bash
s=DCIS66T_chip2
Rscript scripts/create_archr.public.R \
    ${s}_atac \
    ${s}/atac/output/summary/${s}.fragments.tsv.gz 
```

**image xxx**


### 1.3. Creating Signac object for analysis

This script will create a Signab object to prepare the scATAC data analysis. It will 1) filter cells based on the TSS enrichment score and the number of unqiue fragments that are measured by ArchR, 2) keep cells with the valid dispensing record, and 3) performt the basic analysis including clustering and UMAP visualization to give a quick overview of the possible clusters.  

``` bash
s=DCIS66T_chip2
Rscript scripts/create_signac.public.R 
    ${s}_atac \
    $s/atac/output/summary/$s.fragments.tsv.gz \
    8 "1e3" "1e5" 0 1 
```

The last 4 paramters are used to control how to filter cells: 
1) define the min TSS score per cell. Default: 8. 
2) define the min number of fragments per cell. Defaut: 1,000. 
3) define the max number of fragments per cell. Default: 10,000. If the fragment number is too high in a cell, this cell could be very likely to be a doublet -- should be removed from the downstream analysis.  
4) whether binarize the data. 0=non-binarized, 1=binarized. In the non-cancer and normal samples, this should be binarized. In the cancer samples, we recommend not binarizing the data. 
5) whether use the QC results of ArchR. Default: 1. 0=No, 1=Yes. 


**image xx**

<details>
<summary> What is the appropriate cutoff for TSS enrichment score? </summary>
Different cutoff is suggested depending on species and the genome assembly version. We chose 8 for hg19 (see <a href="https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41587-019-0206-z">Satpathy et al 2019</a>). Further read the instructions from ENCODE: https://www.encodeproject.org/atac-seq/. 
</details>

<details>
<summary> Why using ArchR to calcualte the TSS enrichment score? </summary>
We find the TSS score calcualted by ArchR is morely likely in the value range of the ENCODE instruction, whereas the Signac calculation is not. 
</details>

<details>
<summary> What is the appropriate cutoff for fragment number? </summary>
It depends on the specific data because of many factors, for example, the sequencing depth. In most cases, 1000 is a reasonable number to remove the empty or low quality cell (see <a href="https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41587-019-0206-z">Satpathy et al 2019</a>).
</details>

Now, the Signac object is ready for further downstream processing and analysis. 

## 2. Preprocessing the scDNA modality data

Input: 
1. The folder saving demultiplexed FASTQ files for the scDNA modality. 
    - <kbd>fq/DCIS66T_chip2/dna</kbd>
2. The text file recording the wells with cells dispensed. 
    - <kbd>wafergen/135581_insue_WellList.TXT</kbd>

Expected ouput: A Copykit object. 

### 2.1. Generating scCNA matrix and quality control by CNA-pipeline

The CNA-pipeline will use call the copy number alterations at a ~220kb resolution. 

``` bash
for s in DCIS66T_chip2
do 
    echo $s
    resdir="./rds/${s}_dna"
    mkdir -p $resdir
    cd $resdir
    ls fq/$s/dna/*/*.gz > $resdir/sample_list.txt
    <PATH_IN_YOUR_COMPUTER>/CNA_pipeline_v1.4/run_CNA.sh \
        --fastq $resdir/sample_list.txt \
        --res 200 -o $resdir/res_200k
done
```



### 2.2. Creating copykit object for analysis

``` bash
rcmd='scripts/create_copykit.conventional.R'
for s in DCIS66T_chip2_dna 
do 
    Rscript $rcmd \
      /rds/$s/res_200_k_reg/final_result \
      /rds/$s $s &
done
```



